so our guest at the show is Norman Grant
Norman we see each other so often at the
shows in Poland but we never really
talked for the interview so I'm really
glad to have you on the show and my
first question obviously is how do you
feel when you come to Poland an over
time it seems like to be Anover homand
well brother Marin as you know you know
twinkle brother has been coming to
Poland since
1988 you know and every time we come
it's a good feeling different feeling
but great Vibes you know and um I think
the last time I was there maybe a couple
of years ago with the Tribune of Toki I
was there last here you know cuz we come
here very regularly you know and it's a
pleasure really to go to another country
where people accept your music or
listening to your music for all this
time because from in the'
70s you know as far as I heard you
know the Polish people been listening to
music you know clh is the man that
greetings for yeah that make all this
happen you know he's the one that
started it you know he came to London in
uh 1986 and he invited me over and I did
come and still coming you know so that
is great great you know it's a good
experience really we'll go back to your
polish Adventures but now I want to go
to very early beginning you are born in
Jamaica I've read you started actually
your music career with your brother when
you were only six can you tell me about
these
Beginnings yeah well you know we grew up
you know around listening you know the
churches and thing you we have the poam
minia church every day you know music
and in the neighborhood on the corner
lots of music happening so ourself
remember you know we had a guy who used
to organized the the young kids you know
for um concerts and thing and you learn
to get put your lines together and you
know I remember even writing your own
music from you know around that time my
brother and myself we started out um
playing cans and pans you know I used to
knock get different size cans and pans
you know when they TR the rubbish we
look for them and hear the different
sounds the story says you made your
first guitar out of some fish can well
ran you know he was he he was scholing
around the guitar you know and um get
you have the fishing line we used to
fishing we get some broken line and we
made you I made one myself you know but
I was more into the drum you know so I
create a little drum kit out of pans and
thing R know you get the the thing and
the Sardine the Sardine tin we use that
as the the flat part kill all the sound
you know and put the string on and you
get a sound you
know so that's where it started you know
and not just only you know twinkle
brother started that way a lot of
Jamaican band
that's where they started you know
making their own equipment cuz you know
we didn't have money or anybody to give
us any you could you tell me about uh
your family were your parents involved
into your interest in music somehow well
my parents were very busy trying to
raise us you know cuz like um my daddy
go to work very early but he was the one
who was would sing to us you know in the
weekend time we take us to the beach you
always tell us we shouldn't go to the
beach on our own we should have a big
person with us cuz you know you could
drown or something like that and that
because you can swim things could happen
so he would bring us that way and I said
some of those old Jamaican folk song he
would sing to us and I remember he he
used to love to sing lots of church
church song my mom also she grew up in
the church but but it doesn't like they
were actually playing any instrument or
such where we learn from them but we
hear their voice they sing and lots of
other people sing your neighbor sing so
you just catch bits J think yes yes the
official starting date for twio brothers
is
62 uh it's the same time when Jamaica
got independence many Jamaicans I'm
saying it was very uh impressive and it
made them really doing music was it the
same with you that you felt on this wave
of Independence yes because I'm like 62
I was 12 and when we heard we were
getting Independence and you know that
you know separation from other thing we
going to be our own nation and think you
feel very proud of that so that
creativeness you know bloom bloom in all
of us because you said okay we on our
own now we're independent country so we
can do our own thing you know so we
start to create our own music so even
for me the festival that we went in 1962
was the Jamaica Pap and Mento Festival
so every Parish had a festival and you
could enter on a parish level so we
enter that year on the parish level and
we won for our Parish M and then we we
semi-final now we enter against other
parishes like St
James um St Elizabeth
Anova you know and um West
Milan so we won also from 62 we won
right up until
1968 we won the all Island Festival so
we won two gold medals 1968 one as
twinker brothers and one Norman Grant
you know so that Festival actually you
know not just the side of it but even
the the the professional
singers they were in it you know T and
mats he enter about four or five time in
the professional side of it you know so
I think that was great for Jamaica
because I you know we say well we could
start an industry you know but it didn't
turn out the way we think because I I I
think well okay you know you sing and
you're popular in Jamaica we could say
make the music from Jamaica and it go
abroad and you get popular or whatever
but most singers who make record in
Jamaica would have to follow where the
record go so you'll end up going abroad
and it's when you go abroad you know
that things are happening cuz being in
Jamaica you're not going to know what's
happening or you know in the world yeah
in the work or you know how much people
like your music you know so it was great
for me to even start to travel at an
early point in the business and even
start to producing myself at a early
point in business because as I said
Jamaica artist shouldn't have to go
abroad to go and make money I think we
could stay in Jamaica and the money come
to us but it didn't go that way you have
to go travel yeah you have to go and you
know seek for it you know you are a
prime example of such traveling artists
with your movement M to UK but before we
talk about these movements I would also
like to ask you what kind of music did
you do in this very beginning it was it
was some years before rega was created
so did you do SCA and mental yeah in the
early time because as I say I started
out singing with bands from I was 14 so
that is um
64 and it was mainly American songs and
songs from England that would be hearing
and the Calypso because the tourist come
to the Caribbean to listen to Calypso so
in the early part in the business you
would be seeing any popular song that
play you know on the radio cuz Jamaica
up till now they still love to play
foreign music you don't hear lots of
Jamaican music in Jamaica you know so we
grew up listening to all these songs
from abroad and then you try to imitate
these songs SS you know whether if he a
group You' be listening to Impressions
you know the shy lights you know um
Temptation Smokey Robinson and the
Miracles you you'll be listening those
groups R&B from America M Soul so we'll
be singing Everything we'll be singing
James Brown Funk Calypso at the same
time MH and ballads from England M you
know and I think that was a good
training ground for me you know to know
all those Melodies and different
Melodies that help you to create your
own your own style and also help you not
to clash with other music that already
made cuz they have singers now that
singing other singers Melody and don't
even realize that it's somebody it's
somebody else's Melody you know they
don't know enough and you know with
Melodies we grow up from a little kid
listening to Melodies you might not even
realize that you heard it already but
music as you know is a certain cards
which you're going to repeat yourself
over and over but it's the way you do it
and the way you put the notes and things
you know so for myself I give thanks
that I have the ability to make lots of
music and every day I make music even we
doing this interview know and we might
hit on a subject that we can put to
music that's how I create my stuff in
yeah it's it's all music but also in
terms of the message J rastafar has been
a solid foundation for your music for
ages H how did you heard first about
Rasta and J and Rastafari how did you
get involved where we grew up as I say
and everything seeing everything you
know happening it was just around you
yeah it was around us you know and like
say from you know 14 or so you have R
man them a chance so even like 66 when
each came to Jamaica the time we were
well I start making music by then you
know but there's rer man was telling us
are telling the the
community how to live good stop eat salt
stop eat sugar you know them things you
know so even nowadays your people would
say what the r was telling them from all
this time what to do to take care of
your body you know and they weren
listening to the RAS of man from that
time you know so for me as I say I grew
up around the churches you know and I
was very interested about even the
scripture you know the Bible and all
those story you know so even that pulled
Us close to everything you know but
being I'm 73 now and I
still still searching in you know and
seeking but you know you know and to
know is to know you know so we know that
well for me as you say we talk about
rasa and thing and I believe and know in
rasa not everybody would believe what I
believe but it's good to believe in
something you know because if you live
life and don't have any guidance within
your life you're a waste you know you
would as the Majesty did say you would
be like a ship
without no R in a sea where the the wave
would box you around around and around
so with rasa or with other people are
talking about love and peace that's what
it's all about in whatever name you
might
conceive that person to be you know but
as I said we learn as rasa we learn from
the Bible but even know reading other
Bible I know about other things even
though it's not just the Bible you know
the Bible was written many many times
you know so for me as a raser anything
good I I
respect and support and support yes I
was really surprised to read but once in
Jamaica you had a band called the
Cardinals from the point of view of the
Performing priest it was really
surprising to me how did you get this
name was it something no well that's the
first bner we were in it was is um the
first band that farm in falma and these
musician they were like from you know
upper class middle class you know I've
heard lawyers yeah
kind so me and a brother was the only
get youth in the B you know and we were
playing all over you know the hotels cuz
around them time many hotels montea Bay
um Lucy nigil o you know we drive all
over plane so we we would work in like
six nights a week go to school daytime
and go and work in in the night time you
know and that was again a good band then
that band break up and they form another
band Schubert and the Miracles with some
of the say the guys were in the
Cardinals they were in sh and the
Miracles and again we took it to another
level we're in another band in monteo
Bay um um LEL and the St M I start work
with them actually getting paid you know
I think I get them about 20 something
pounds a week you know which at the time
was still you know good money you know
yeah and um I was with um Celestial L
and Celestia for about 8 years MH you
know working and even going entering in
the festival at the same time and go to
work and and then we we made two albums
with that band in hotels it sell to the
tourist and as a matter of fact just a
month ago I saw one of the album guy
bought one for
£150 you get it from America so those
record is still available you know as
you know vinyl everybody know is going
back to vinyl and on that album I think
I did a reg I I did um little green
apples in regga and I did it before even
um Dennis Brown made do a regular
version I did it but the albums at the
time I was singing songs like Up Up and
Away uh to serve with Love Popcorn you
know pure American Soul you know you
know but then I said Jamaican bands
we're playing all Jazz L you know we we
grew up playing everything all them
musician that played on the Scot music
yeah they guys guys were playing jazz
and they learn from other things you
know so these Jamaican big band from
that time like 15 members in the band
like four on Section yeah like scalit
very big bands and those music now is
still still
selling it seems like a a Breaking Point
in twinkle Brothers history at least in
global recognition was a deal with
Virgin in England to
your albums was it really like this was
it your first serious Global exposure
and how do you look at this things from
the time
perspective well I think that was the
best deal I got I got three Deals in
England actually actually approached
Street company and virgin was the third
one and their deals was the best one you
know I mean they put us in a market
where we maybe you know we couldn't
maybe put ourselves
and I remember at that time the punk
music and the
punk reation and they love reg music
just like the skin head love the sca
music so The Roots Music now we're
playing along with the punk music so
virgin would put out some compilation
album and you would have like um sex
pistol Twi MERS Gladiators you know on
one
album so you know we start to go into a
crowd as I said that maybe we would get
to go you know so we give thanks for
that but in the business you know cuz I
haven't approached another company since
virgin you know you know twinkle put you
started your own yeah you know so I
would say that was the best one at the
time but 30 years after you realize it
still wasn't a good deal you you could
make better FS on own but we give thanks
and I'm not going to going to ball you
know how did you look at this punks in
England I guess you were traveling to
England a lot in the second part of 70s
how did you look at this colorful
Revolution well you know I started going
to England
1975 you know and um when I go there
twinkle music was already popular there
so for me that was great because I've
been to America after that and for me
America is too big of a country and it's
not like America is not like reg is
popular in every state You' maybe have
to pass one two state to go to the state
that Reg is popular and the traveling
Journey for me is too long you know
England now everything is quicker you
know smaller country even even Europe I
love
yeah you travel shter you know yeah so
the experience really for England and
with the music people knew the music
it's not like you had to come and you
know play to make it and that's the way
in America they you would have to play
to make your name you know and that is
one thing I don't like about it where to
just drive up on down to play to get
popular I'm not into that you know so
it's good when you can go places that
people actually know you already or hear
about you or whatever I prefer that you
know when opening new markets and taking
all risks yeah you know know that I'm a
big man now it even worse now you know I
stay home with my grandchildren now you
know or in the studio making music cuz
every day I make music talking about
studio and studio and Studio work D has
been always a strong part part of your
music I'm wondering how do you look at
the d uh do you follow any particular
way of doing that do you have some uh
dedicated special unique devices do you
do it analog still well as you know with
the music and time everything changed
you know we starting the business when
you know you stay one track
recording everything have to record one
time if one person make mistake you have
to go from the top again and we start
with there have start overdubbing you
know I remember 66 when we made the
first twinkle brother record for Duke
Reed that was when the ban alone was Rec
um lay in the track and you sing but you
must sing too loud so your voice pick up
in the piano or the guitar amplifier so
there was kind of technique that you
have to start to use but I'm a singer
that sing very strong you know even now
you know I'm a strong singer so I would
have to find ways to turn away from the
piano so they don't catch your voice and
even them days when we voiced that song
there were no
headphone the the music playing a box in
the corner of the studio and you listen
and you sing but the engineer for
somehow they knew how to to blend the
thing that you don't hear the the
background noise or
whatever and I think the music was
better those days better made from they
change it from four track from two track
four track the 16 track the 24
tracks I don't think it make it better
for sales or so because some of the
songs weren't even selling more you were
selling less you know and even now the
music that the people love the Jamaican
music that people love right now is the
early the early stuff the SCAR or 70s
and
80s the those rhythms those music are
what worldwide know people are craving
for you know but from the oversight
Jamaica is also famous for current dance
hall no we we fa for everything know
tell you because in Jamaica you could be
playing a good Groove and you going
playing and somebody just say too much
of that though we want something
different you know so Jamaica good with
giving something different and we change
the music so much time even half key out
of key singers out of T music being hits
M you know one time people in Jamaica
they were just into Melodies so a beat
could be going boom boom bo and you
could sing any song over that song and
the crowd would say yeah some singer
they're not singing on timing but the
crowd still love them and they become
big stars and they realize they not
can't sing on time they're not doing the
right thing now in Jamaica we turn it
around we gone back to
R&B so you go to Jamaica now you don't
really hear reggae you still play regga
but not the Deep Roots reg you know it's
I don't know they might soon give it
another name I think they also do you
know they they change the name so often
even with the dubs as you were saying
earlier on you know the dub music at a
time or what happened with the dub now
you have
some audience that love reg music but
don't love the lyrics of the music you
know lots of reg music especially
cultural Roots Music with fire firebone
Babylon you know we singing about truth
and rights and singing some songs some
people might think it's too
personal so it's too personal for them
so they don't listen to the lyrics so
the
dub nobody's fire burning them on the
dub you so they could be in the
LSD whatever drugs they take and they
just go to the dub you know so that
again is another part of the music that
people love the regga so they even know
about reg music by start listening some
dub and then maybe want somebody else
would tell him but that is just a d if
you hear the original or hear the vocal
then they might seek again for the vocal
you know
true you mentioned that people in
Jamaica really follow Melodies but what
I observed myself at the places like
Rebel salute is that sometimes some
unknown For Me singer gets on stage and
everybody immediately start to sing
every single word they know the lyrics
it seems like people in Jamaica really
take care of the lyrical content of the
songs and I'm wondering if you feel some
special personal responsibility for the
things you were
singing well one should you know at the
end of the day well if whatever I sing I
try to mean what I sing and try to live
what I Sing
Because as a artist or as a people or
the word the word is the power you know
and if you're saying things that you
don't believe or mean it can hurt you it
can damage you you know so if you're
singing
something you know you're that you're
against and you end up you're into what
you're singing about you know cuz really
that's what happened to a lot of singer
people they just sing what they think
people like or you know people would
gravitate to you know and not the true
true self of what you really you know
believe in you know so that again we got
to be careful of using
words because word have lots of power
you know so I myself I I try not to sing
words that I don't mean you know and I
also try to use lyrics that maybe people
talk about but they don't sing about all
lyrics of Twinkle brothers are yours oh
yes you know but you know with lyrics
you you listen to people you you read
the face you read the magazine you read
the news you whatever so with words the
written words is is there you know so
you may be reading a book reading the
Bible and you see a line is say yeah and
you put Melody to that line or whatever
so we didn't claim in words the written
words is written from thousand years ago
you know just how you use words and
Melodies you
know what did you know about Poland
before you met cl to
Brothers well I remember well Poland
what I know about Poland in the 60s cuz
I born 1950 so when I was like 10 12 the
cheapest shoes that your parents could
buy for you is made in Poland really and
it was strong strong leather shoes or
strong shoes you know at sounds
incredible yes made in Poland you know
so when I actually come to you know get
to come here you know and see well when
we start to come then the money you know
we come and we got paid in
zeles millions of zelati so that is
another you know experience I had if I
never to count Millions again I've count
millions in Poland you know see some
money with lot lots of Zer lots of zeros
on it you know so that was another
experience because we we got the money
and the musician they get you know like
half a million each whatever to go and
spend and they go into the stores well
what I tell them I told them was to buy
anything just buy you see something you
buy but they were trying to find what
they like before they buy uhhuh I was
buying like a dozen that I buy a
trombone I buy I buy a trumpet you know
I buy some leather coat I think I buy
about 15 leather coats I pay5 work out
the5 for the coat here in Poland I took
them to London and I sell them for 85
each I bought some leather skirt for
women took them to Jamaica serious I I
took I took back three suitcases to
London so I I invest the money same way
and turn it you know yeah and I had
money millions in the bank here was in
in the Polish bank and we come and then
within the changes and they said no they
don't want polish money you have to have
dollars you know so that as I say it was
really a good experience for me you know
and as I say even with the p I start my
recording studio I bought my recording
studio
95 and I can remember distinctively is
like after we did a tour in Poland and I
go back London I I start buying my
equipments you know so even that again
is another memory for Poland you know
you say yeah I I so you became a Trader
you were yeah importing and exporting
you yes yes and it work you know but the
first think with Poland was in London
yeah the V CL allocated you in lond yeah
two brothers were there uhhuh and they
came to you and what yeah they find me I
think they said they they looking out
for artists who who who live in London
you know and for some reason we
connected and you know we came to the
house and we had an interview and we
even went to Jos Shaka to Jos Shaka shop
had another interview and was saying y
was saying um was saying you don't know
how we going to do it but we should come
you know and as I said the money was the
problem to said well you will get PID
but it would
be you know so I did take it you know I
turn it around you know and it work I
say I had I had a bank account here you
know and we have millions in the bank
account but then the dollar start it
start to devalue you know so we just had
to find way to to spend it but you know
for me it was good and I mean I've SE
the changes from that time till now and
every change is good but you you can see
some
change where you know you you well what
I what I realized you know the time we
came in the was Communist time I guess
888 you're traveling on the on the bus
or the public transport or whatever the
old
people there were to me cuz I I live in
England and the old people the same ages
like the one in England they in Poland
they're strong they look strong and fit
and you don't hear them coughing like in
England you go on the public
transport people like they are very bad
you know chess Co or whatever these
people were like you know proud you know
in their four qutes you know like cuz I
even buy a four quat here you
know they're in their far quarted and
they sitting the you know really proud
and thing you know and even the the kids
now they were fire burning the soldiers
we come we come on the plane you see the
soldiers and the T big guns and thing
but the the youth them in the street
they're like
cheing them you know and another
experience you know you go to the
churches or any on because you are
overloading you speak louder
now and I have a problem in the
headphones hear too
loud sorry for breaking yeah okay we be
better uhhuh yes I could remember even
going into the churches and anywhere
flowers were plant this is I wanted to
ask you about it because I remember once
you told me you've seen some ganja
plants in the church in the churchard in
among the flowers you know the kids said
they planted all I remember we did the
album here in the spirit studio and we
recording the studio and outside the
ganja out there we just going get ganja
and put it on the the eer to dry out a
bit Yeah so we getting her you know so
that was again the experience you see
yeah you're smoking her and nobody know
what you're smoking nobody you know
Cur but with the change now I heard the
farmers the guy that start to steal the
farmers ganja you know you know and the
change what I've seen like in
Warsaw in the Communist time I never see
any Beggars or so on the street or
nothing like that you know but with the
change as you know change bring
everything and when the change happen I
see lots of
Beggars you know they're everywhere well
I guess
capitalism you know when it come to
capitalism all these things you're going
to see you know begging
prostituting drug around yeah and that
you know rules so the people they they
vote for for that and they get it you
know cuz I said we came and even did
shows for um
solidarity and you know help within the
change you put the solidarity logo on
the yeah that was on the the um
underground LP and that LP came out 84 I
think 84 84 yeah so we were thinking
about what was happening cuz it was on
the news you
know on the news and thing you know so
these are the things I do you know I I
yes I I make
songs about world affairs world
happening you know yeah so you can see
the solid yeah it's here
yeah okay how uh how it happened that
you were uh asked for collaboration with
tunki obviously it's a very important
project for Global World music and I
know it was idea of vodic yes v he's the
one that um yeah what was your first
thoughts did you like this music or you
had to convince yourself a little bit
well what when we actually you know it's
not well he told us that there's a group
from the mountain and they're conscious
with their lyrics and they're you know
really
spiritual and you know same way like how
we from Jamaica twinkle Brothers we do
Roots Music He said now yeah this group
there into that and he said he see where
if we
collaborate something could happen you
know I don't even remember if I did hear
any kind of music but when we came and
heard what was
happening myself now as a drummer with d
Judah I was just Judah and myself that
came and we hear the thing as you know
said to Judah now what we have to do we
listen them but we're not going to
follow them we have to create our beat
keep the beat so they you know it was
like have to go in my head and no the
rythm must be there yeah we have to keep
a beat you know so don't you know listen
too much to that they carry away we have
to hold ourself and because it was just
two of
us you know to do the base and the drum
first and then overdub so that's good
thing about overdubbing at least you you
can start from two instrument and over
du over du what was the biggest surprise
after you arrived to this uh remote
Polish Village in the
mountains well I I tell it you I wasn't
surprised
was well to me it was like a tourist
area you know cuz um we see the lots of
well it look like Polish people too but
they come from maybe the cities and come
there so when they take us him to
certain place and everybody dress in the
the same outfit and thing you know it's
said okay it's a like a village Village
Vibes so I said okay that was good about
it that we took pictures I took picture
with you know the hat and the and we
sing about it you know so yeah it's a
good good experience Good Vibes and it
was always snowy time when we come we
make the records was always snow we went
up in the
mountain you went to as far as your knee
in in snow yeah must be different U uh
perspective when Blue Mountains oh yes
you know but you know we did everything
you know it was still a good vibes I
remember when we were making a film a
video and we in the mountain and I I cry
out J the far the the placees get we
have to leave the mountain you know cuz
the snow more snow start coming yeah and
you know one one good experience I have
is
like although you you're cold but you
could get some hot hot beer it give you
a hot beer to drink you know a hot
Spirit you warm up warm up instruct you
know so we still love the Polish Vibes
and hopefully our next project
you know the way I see it it could
happen from Jamaica you know CU we I
come here twice now to make you know two
album or so with the Tribune of Toki so
I I will speak you know I'm saying it
now publicly I will speak to um
Kristoff about the next venture when it
come about you know we could plan
something for Jamaica come Jamaica dream
to bring Tunas to Jamaica and record the
album yeah
yeah yeah project in Jamaica you know
it's just a planning you know and it can
happen you know and you have your own
studio in Jamaica and you are going to
open your Club oh yes I I'm going to
open a like a youth club you know I want
to do something for the the youths you
know cuz I said when I was growing up we
had those facility could go to youth
club as a a kid and create your own
little thing the stage shows you go and
show your talent and people hear you so
if you have some Talent from a early age
that always good and it helps you know
so the young young ones you know they
are the ones I would like to you know do
something for you know see and a special
message for the Polish listeners and a
final word well we just give thanks that
they're listening and keep listening and
you know we know the right thing and the
people who know the right thing should
do the right thing and less talk and
more action you know from everyone not
just a politician but individual too you
know thank you normal man for the
interview give thanks give
[Music]
thanks